# my-avionics
This project demonstrates how to build a set of custom avionics using diy-efis

The diy-efis project is a public project that is designed to support the kotuku avionics systems.  These
are all can-based and the can protocol is published in the diy-efis project.  Kotuku manufactures
devices that host applications built on top of the diy-efis project.  At present they support a 3.5"
5" and 10.4" display.

## The concept

The kotuku hardware is provided at a low cost, and comes with no avionics installed.  Sounds nuts
but that is what diy-efis is about.  You can download a series of instruments from the diy-efis site
and as of development this is composed of:

### 3.5" layouts

- **aio** An all in one display that has all of the basic instruments needed.
- **att** An attiude indicator with the airframe data displayed as well, 3.5" display.
- **edd** An engine monitor, the kotuku EDD can support up to 6 cylinders but this is designed for a 4 cylinder engine.
- **hsi** A simple HSI with navigation information and autopilot commander.
- **nav** A moving map navigator display.

### 5" layouts

We have not done any yet.  Hardware is in need of a sunlight readable display....

### 10.4" layouts

- **pfd** A display with everything on one 1024x600 pixel sunlight readable display.
- **setup** An experimental implementation of a dialog setup display.

## How to build things.

This project includes a git external to diy-efis, and it will come in as /diy-efis and in there are the sample
projects, support libraries and tools.

Some tools are written in c++, some are written in python.  The main tool is yehudi which compiles
layouts defined in an XML file to pure 'C' code.

There are 3 libraries

- **lib/canfly** This is the interface between the avionics and our operating system.  Most of it is auto generated by our upstream build.
- **lib/mfdlib** This library is the basis of our common applications.  You don't actually need it unless you are building an app the way we do.
- **lib/proton** All of the widgets that go to make an application that yehudi compiles is in this library.

### CMake

All of these projects are built using CMake.  You could use something else, go for it!  We provide a CMakeLists.txt in the root that
ties the build together.  It includes the libraries and tools from diy-efis and includes the 1 sample we have pulled into
this project called n0000_att which is a modified example of an attude indicator for aircraft N0000.

### mips32r2

When we started this project we designed our products using the Microchip pic32MZ processors, specifically the pic32MZ2064DAR processor
but the tools from Microchip are not really open source or what we wanted so we created a project we call [mips32](https://github.com/kotuku-aero/mips32)
which is a GNU GCC compiler collection that includes a GDB debugger.  We spent a lot of time to build something that was free, standard
and with no restrictions.  We also need the GDB debugger, but more on that later.

### Some sort of IDE or editor

This project was made to be friendly to modern IDE's here is what we can say:

- **Jetbrians CLion** A great IDE and cross platform, we use it on Linux.  We don't like the overly helpfull AI stuff in it though.
- **Microsoft Visual Studio 2026** This version is very good on Windows and is what we use to build the upstream parts.  We still use Microchip MPLABX to debug the devices, but the building and editing is done using this tool.
- **VSCode** Well we recommend using [VSCodium](https://vscodium.com/) with all of the plugins needed for CMake etc.  You will need the GDB debugger plugin.  We don't use it, but it can work.

### Build the sample.

You can just open the folder with the sample app.  We assume that if you have managed to get the repository cloned you will know how to update externals and pull diy-efis.  Otherwise look it up online.

After CMake parses the root project you can then compile and run it.  Assuming you are on Linux/Windows to test your layout then you need to give it some parameters.  The first time the app runs, it will complain and tell you to give it some parameters.  For VS2026 here are the parameters for a 3.5" engine data display:

```
    {
      "type": "default",
      "project": "CMakeLists.txt",
      "projectTarget": "edd.exe (bin\\edd.exe)",
      "name": "edd.exe (bin\\edd.exe)",
      "args": [
        "-c",
        "4096",
        "-x",
        "320",
        "-y",
        "240",
        "-m",
        "c:/Projects/map-data",
        "canfly.cdb"
      ]
    }
```

A word of advice, the -m option is optional.  It will copy all of the files from the folder (c:/projects/map-data) in this case into the emulated flash file system.  Needed for the HSI and NAV avionics.  The sample map data is in the free [nav-data[(https://github.com/kotuku-aero/map-data.git) project.
